

P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 1
This  Checklist  is  provided
for your convenience while
completing the petition and
the checklist should not be
returned to the Court.
Probate Proceeding Checklist
(see Surrogate’s Court Form P-1, rev. 2/08)
Check All Forms To Make Sure Venue Is Correct - Appropriate County Is Listed
Fill In All Areas On All Pages of Petition - Also Mark When Not Applicable Where Necessary
PET
¶ #DESCRIPTIONYESNO
Is the captioned name the same as the signature on the Will and ¶2 of petition?
If A/K/A’s, are they listed in the caption and also under ¶2 of petition?
Has the type of Letters been checked?
1.(a)Is the name of each fiduciary the same as in Will?
If NO, does petitioner explain why?
Is the petitioner ...the nominated executor
alternate executor
or person eligible under SCPA §1402 or 1418 (admin. c.t.a.)
  NOTE: A Non-domiciliary alien is ineligible to be sole fiduciary (SCPA §707)
1.(b)If an attorney and sole executor: has a statement been filed pursuant to Court
Rules §207.16(e)?
1.(c)Has SCPA §2307-a been complied with?
2.(a)Is the name of the decedent the same as the signature on Will?
Are all A/K/A’s listed?
2.(b)Does date of death agree with death certificate?
Certified death certificate must be filed with petition
2.(c)Is the place of death the same as that listed on death certificate?
2.(d)Is the address on petition and death certificate the same? this county?
If NOT, has an explanatory affidavit with proofs of domicile been filed?
(SCPA §206 & 208)
If decedent was a non-domiciliary of the State, has information been furnished
pursuant to SCPA §1605 showing ...
If  the  will  was  previously  admitted  to  probate  the  petitioner
should submit Administration c.t.a. form CTA-1.

PET
¶ #DESCRIPTIONYESNO
P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 2
2.(d)
cont.
(1) no original probate or administration proceeding has been or will be
filed in any other jurisdiction
(2) statement that testator left probatable assets in this jurisdiction
(3) statement listing the distributees in the domiciliary jurisdiction or that
they are the same as under New York State Law
2.(e)Is the citizenship of decedent listed?
NOTE: Does all information provided under ¶2 agree with death certificate; if not, has an
explanatory affidavit been provided? Check that marital status is correct; submit divorce decree if
requested by the court.
3.
Make sure that original will and codicil are filed with affidavit(s) of attesting witnesses or
necessary documents requesting that the affidavits be dispensed with are filed. (With one surviving
witness submit form P-8; if all witnesses are deceased submit forms P-8 and P-9 for one witness
and P-9 for decedent.)
Are dates listed correctly for Will and Codicils?
Are all witnesses listed correctly?
If necessary - did witnesses see original will or a court-certified copy?
see  SCPA §1406(2)
Is affidavit of comparison with copy of will (& codicils) submitted?
NOTE: Witnesses may not notarize each other’s signatures on witness depositions.
4.Answer “NONE” or specify?
5.
NOTE: Distributee: Any person entitled to take/share in property under EPTL §4-1.1 and 4-1.2.
Has the number of survivors been listed?
Has “NO” been inserted in all prior classes?
Has an “X” been inserted in all subsequent classes?
NOTE: If alleged that the decedent was survived by no distributee or only one distributee or where
the relationship of distributees to the decedent is grandparents, aunts, uncles, first cousins or first
cousins once removed, has an Affidavit of Heirship been submitted - see Court Rules §207.16(c).
6.(a)Are all distributees (who are of full age and sound mind) listed with the
required information? (Court needs Form P-4 [Acknowledged Waiver of
Process/Consent to Probate] see SCPA §401(4), or proposed citation for each
person listed under 6(a). Provide copy of death certificate or date of death for
any deceased distributee.) NOTE: Administrator c.t.a. see SCPA §1418 - use
waiver P-11.

PET
¶ #DESCRIPTIONYESNO
P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 3
6.(a)
cont.
Is each person designated as primary executor listed?
Are all persons adversely affected by the purported exercise by such Will
of any power of appointment listed?
Are all persons adversely affected by any codicil listed?
Are all persons listed under any other Will of the decedent on file in the
Surrogate’s Court listed?
If there is an inter vivos trust or other testamentary substitute, are
trustees and beneficiaries affected by the will listed?
Has a copy of the Trust been submitted?
6.(b)Same as 6.(a) above but are persons under disability
NOTE: IF THERE ARE PERSONS UNDER DISABILITY LISTED UNDER 6(b) A GUARDIAN
AD LITEM WILL HAVE TO BE APPOINTED AND A CITATION ISSUED. (see SCPA §306 &
307)
NOTE: THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION HAS TO BE PROVIDED UNDER 6(b) AND 7(b)
IF THERE ARE PERSONS UNDER DISABILITY.
INFANTS:
Name, birth date, relationship to decedent, domicile/residence address, person
with whom he/she resides
Is there a court-appointed guardian? If so, submit name and residence address
and information regarding appointment (submit proof of appointment).
Are parents living?
ALL OTHER PERSONS UNDER DISABILITY:
Name, relationship to decedent, residence address
Facts regarding disability: has a committee, conservator, guardian, or any other
fiduciary been appointed (submit proof of appointment)
Has the person under disability been committed to any institution?
Are the names and addresses of any committee, person or institution having
care and custody of him/her, conservator, guardian and any relative or
friend having an interest in his/her welfare listed?
If a person is confined as a prisoner: place of incarceration listed and name and
address of any person(s) having an interest in his/her welfare
Unknowns: described in the same language as will be used in the citation

PET
¶ #DESCRIPTIONYESNO
P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 4
6.(b)
cont.
NOTE: IF THERE ARE UNKNOWNS, the following proof has to be submitted:
affidavit showing that diligent efforts have been made to locate unknown
distributees or distributees whose whereabouts are unknown [Court Rules
§207.16(d)]
“DILIGENT SEARCH” requires extensive research, e.g.:
cemetery and marriage records; telephone books; conversation with other distributees,
neighbors, etc.; records of varied Surrogate’s Court; military records; Bureau of
Immigration & Naturalization; Social Security Administration; Bureau of Vital Statistics;
Department of Motor Vehicles; Bureau of the Census; City directories; Internet
7.(a)Court needs Form P-6 [Notice of Probate/Affidavit of Mailing] for all persons
listed under 7(a) & 7(b) - see SCPA §1409.  
Are the names and domiciliary addresses of all substitute or successor
executors, trustees, guardians listed? If predeceased - provide death
certificate or date of death.
Are all legatees (any person designated to receive a transfer by will of personal
property) who is of full age and sound mind listed?
Are all devisees (any person to whom real property is transferred by will) who is
of full age and sound mind listed?
Are all other beneficiaries, who are of full age and sound mind, named in the
will listed?
Are charities receiving a residuary share? If so the State Attorney General must
receive a notice of probate.
Are any trustees and beneficiaries of any inter vivos trust designated in the
purported will other than those named in paragraph 6 listed?
7.(b)Same as 7.(a) above but are persons under a disability (see ¶6b). see SCPA
§1409(2) and SCPA §307(3) and (4).
8.Has “NONE” been entered or is there an indication of the confidential
relationship? (May require a PUTNAM hearing.)
9.(a)Has value of estate been listed? (do not include joint assets, insurance left to a
beneficiary, non-probate assets)
9.(b)Has “NONE” been entered or has cause of action been specified?
10.Under WHEREFORE Clause: has type of letters and all relief requested been
checked and completed?

PET
¶ #DESCRIPTIONYESNO
P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 5
10.
cont.
Is petition dated, signed, verified, properly notarized (including proper jurat
and expiration date of notary’s commission)?
Is oath and designation signed?
does it set forth proposed fiduciary’s physical address?
Is proposed fiduciary a Bank? use combined corporate verification, consent and
designation [use page 6 of the petition]
Is attorney’s name, address and phone number listed?
Is Part 130 Certification completed by attorney or self-represented party?
if NOT, has a separate certification as to Part 130 signing requirements
been included?
If forms are computer generated, has a certification pursuant to Court Rules §207.4 been attached?
PARTIAL FEE SCHEDULE
SCPA/EPTL§
 or Rule #
Have the proper fees been included with petition?
Fees per schedule; $6.00 for each Certificate of Appointment.
Filing fee is based upon the values of the estate owned individually by the
decedent or payable to the Estate - see SCPA §2402(8)
0 but under 10,000$      45.00
10,000 but under 20,00075.00
20,000 but under 50,000215.00
50,000 but under 100,000280.00
100,000 but under 250,000420.00
250,000 but under 500,000625.00
500,000 and over1,250.00
If Letters of Trusteeship are requested include an additional $45.00 for this
appointment (after checking with individual court of filing as to fee policies).
2402

P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 6
COMMENTS AND COURT NOTES
Form
Number
SCPA/EPTL§
 or Rule #
When
Permitted
Whenever decedent dies with a Will.1402
Forms
Always
Required
•Petition for Probate
•Original Will of decedent and Codicil(s), if any
•Affidavit of Comparison (unless waived by court)
•Certified Death Certificate
•Affidavit of Attesting Witnesses
•Self-addressed stamped envelope (if court requires)
P-1
P-13
P-3
1402
207.15(b)
1406
Forms or
Documents
Sometimes
Required
•Application to Dispense with Testimony of Attesting Witness
•Waiver of Process; Consent to Probate
•Notice of Appearance
•Authorization to Appear on Behalf of Party
•Attorney/Fiduciary Statement
•Family Tree Chart (if required by court)
•Affidavit Proving Handwriting of Decedent/Witness
•Renunciation of Nominated Executor and/or Trustee
•Renunciation of Letters of Admin. c.t.a./Waiver of Process
•Affidavit of No Debt (Admin. c.t.a.)
•Citation on Probate
•Affidavit for Supplemental Citation
•Order for Mailing and/or Publication
•Notice to Consul General
•Notice of Probate & Affidavit of Service
•Affidavit of Due Diligence
•Application for Preliminary Letters Testamentary & Oath &
Designation of Preliminary Executor
•Sole Heir Affidavit
•Affidavit of Service (Personal/Mail/Publication)
•Affidavit as to Military Service
•Bond
•Death Certificate of deceased spouse, distributee, beneficiary
or named executor
•Notice of Election by Surviving Spouse
•Waiver or Release of the Right of Election
•Obituary Notice (if court requires)
P-8
P-4
FT-1
P-9
P-10
P-11
P-12
P-5
P-6
P-2
1405
207.16(e) &
   2307-a
207.16(c)
1403
1412
207.16(c)
314
801-805
207.15(c)
5-1.1
5-1.1

P-CHKLST release 4/7/2010    PAGE 7
COMMENTS AND COURT NOTES (continued)
All Waivers and Proofs of Service must show that each interested party actually received a copy
of the Will.
Proofs of Service of Citation must be filed with the Court at least two (2) working days before
the return date.
Guardian Ad Litem will be appointed on or before the return day of process for all unknowns
and persons under disability (SCPA §403).
Petition & Notice of Probate must include names of all persons designated in Will as legatee,
devisee, fiduciary or alternate fiduciary not otherwise listed as an interested party.
Letters will not be delivered until Notice of Probate and Mailing Affidavit are filed.
Review carefully instructions to paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Petition and be sure interested parties
are listed in the correct places.
NYS  Department  of  Taxation  &  Finance  may  be  a  necessary  party  for  estates  of  non-
domiciliary decedents. Review SCPA §1403(1)(g).
Documents  signed  by  Power  of  Attorney  (Provide  certified  copy  of  POA  and  comply  with
Section 13-2.3 EPTL and 207.48 Uniform Rules).
Check to be certain all documents are properly acknowledged.
THIS  MATERIAL  IS  PROVIDED  FOR  INFORMATIONAL/TRAINING  PURPOSES  ONLY.  –  It  is
intended for use in conjunction with review of the applicable statutes and rules of the Surrogate’s Court and the
Surrogate’s Court Operations Manual.